Social Class and Religion 
The two chapters in Part 2 discuss the effects of two powerful variables on student behavior, beliefs, and achievement: social class and religion. Social class is a powerful variable in U.S. society despite entrenched beliefs about individual opportunity in the United States. As Lois Weis points out in Chapter 3 and as Jonathon Kozol (2005) notes in his disturbing book The Shame of the Nation: The Restoration of Apartheid Schooling in America, students who attend affluent middle- and upper-class schools have more resources, better teachers, and better educational opportunities than do students who attend low-income, inner-city schools. Students from the lower, middle, and upper classes usually attend different kinds of schools and have teachers who have dissimilar beliefs and expectations about their academic achievement. The structure of educational institutions also favors middle- and upper-class students. Structures such as tracking, IQ tests, and programs for gifted and mentally retarded students are highly biased in favor of middle- and upper-class students. 
Students who are socialized within religious families and communities often have beliefs and behaviors that conflict with those of the school. Religious fundamentalists often challenge the scientific theories taught by schools about the origin of human beings. The controversy that occurred over intelligent design during the 2005-2006 school year epitomizes this phenomenon. Religious fundamentalists also attack textbooks and fictional books assigned by teachers that they believe violate or contradict their doctrines. Conflicts about the right to pray in the school sometimes divide communities. The school should help students mediate between their home culture and the school culture. Lippy, in Chapter 4, describes the religious diversity within the United States and some of its educational implications. 
Social Class and Education 
Lois Weis 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
1. Identify and discuss the ways that schools are linked to the production and maintenance of social-class inequalities. 2. List key areas in which more research on the relationship between social class and educational outcomes needs to be done. 
3. Compare and contrast ability groups and tracking. 4. Identify key factors in and summarize the literature on the relationship between social class and access to higher education. 5. Describe the ways that social class and educational privilege are related. 6. Discuss the characteristics and educational significance of the Coleman Report. 
Section 402 of the 1964 Civil Rights Act ordered a survey to determine the relationship between student achievement and the kinds of schools students attend. This was done with the expressed intent of determining the extent to which U.S. schools provide opportunities for minority children, with an eye toward finding out whether schools can reduce racially linked inequalities in academic achievement. It was widely expected that massive inequities would be revealed between the characteristics of schools that Black and White children attend (although other racial groups were included in the survey, the primary goal of the survey was to pinpoint reasons for Black-White differences in achievement) and that specific school characteristics could be identified that serve to produce academic outcomes. It was thought that if such variables could be teased out in the analysis, monetary intervention could be justified, and that “lacking" schools could work to build up the pinpointed characteristics through an infusion of federal dollars, thereby equalizing academic outcomes by race. 
Unfortunately, it proved not to be so simple, as the research did not yield the expected results. In 1966, James Coleman and his team reported, in what is popularly known as “The Coleman Report," that differences in achievement across race and socioeconomic status are not easily explained by differences in school-based resources. Their research suggests that individual achievement is, in fact, much more highly correlated with family socioeconomic status (hereafter referred to as social class) than with school characteristics. When standardized test score averages (academic achievement) are compared across sampled schools, more variation exists within schools than between them. The general conclusion of this congressionally mandated report is that the quality of school facilities and programs minimally affects academic achievement when compared with the effect of social class. This set in motion the long-standing mantra “schools make no difference." Put another way, after family background is held constant in the analysis, differences in school facilities and/or programs barely alter academic achievement at all. Academic achievement, argue Coleman and his colleagues, is almost wholly dependent on the family background rather than on what goes on in schools. 
The Coleman Report jump-started a multi-decade research program on the relationship between family background and school-related outcomes, most specifically, academic achievement and attainment (how far one goes in school). Christopher Jencks and colleagues (1972) affirmed and extended Coleman's findings in the somewhat later, and highly controversial, volume Inequality: A Reassessment of the Effect of Family and Schooling in America. By analyzing the Coleman data, Jencks and colleagues furthered the intellectual project regarding the production of inequality through schools. Employing new data as well as that collected by Coleman, the authors concluded that inequality in the United States can be reduced only by 1 percent through balancing the quality of high schools. Additional expenditures on schools, they argued, are unlikely to boost achievement, and any redistribution of school-based resources is not likely to reduce the racially related test score gap. In a widely discussed statement (cited in Karabel & Halsey, 1977), Jencks and colleagues argued that a more fundamental change in society is required before equalizing educational opportunity can make a difference in achievement outcomes. In a highly controversial and contested move, they suggested that socialism" is the only way to affect the existing distribution of wealth and power in the United States, thereby suggesting that schools can and, in fact, do little. More pointedly, they argue that we must stop linking with "marginal" institutions such as schools and get down to the “real” business of equalizing opportunities through equalizing access to jobs and flattening earnings. 
The conclusions of both Coleman and Jencks (although Coleman has received more sustained attention over the years) are often used to support the argument that equalizing school funding will have little direct effect on student achievement. Since the release of the Coleman Report (and, later, the Jencks volume), issues regarding the validity of the test measures employed have emerged. The use of a general intellectual measure (verbal ability instead of a test targeted more specifically to what is taught in school may have led to an underestimation of the importance of schooling (Rutter, Maughan, Mortimore, Ouston, & Smith, 1979). Carver (1975) similarly argues that the results of the Coleman Report are not a surprise since psychometric tests are designed to maximize individual differences and are, therefore, poor measures of achievement. He recommends either the use of criterion-referenced tests, which measure whether a standard has been achieved or tests, which reflect gain due to treatment. In addition, if student leaming is the concern, argues Carver, students should be tested at the beginning and end of a specified interval in school rather than being compared according to school-level test scores. This, he argues, renders Coleman's cross-sectional design inappropriate as a way of assessing the "effects" of school. 
Consolidating the critique, Bowles and Levin (1968) raised questions about the specification of school-based variables such as per-pupil expenditure and student-teacher ratio, which they argue most likely led to an underestimation of the effects of schooling as opposed to student family background. 
Rutter and colleagues' (1979) later work in England offers a more optimistic appraisal of the role of schooling with regard to decoupling the linkage between class and achievement, thereby equalizing academic outcomes. Although suggesting that student achievement differs across secondary schools and that initial variation between schools holds nearly constant over 5 years, the authors nevertheless upend Coleman's "schools make no difference" mantra. Unlike Coleman and Jencks, Rulter's team concludes that it matters which school a student attends because particular characteristics of schools (those associated with the academic and social ethos of the school) lead to student success. 
Although Rutter and colleagues challenge the notion that schools exert scant effect on student outcomes as compared to family background, a large corpus of evidence since Coleman points toward the role that schools play in the reproduction of social-class inequalities both at the individual and collective societal levels. Even though individuals can, of course, transcend their class background through schooling (and there are many examples of such class transcendence), it is arguably the case that schools work largely 10 reproduce and maintain class inequalities rather than fundamentally challenge them. The critical question is, of course: How does this happen? More specifically: What is it about families and schools that serve to reproduce the relatively tight relationship between social class and educational outcomes? 
Keeping in mind both the vastness of the research in this area and the fact that one chapter can offer only a partial answer to this broad-based question, my goal in this chapter is twofold: (1) 10 review select scholarly work on the ways in which elementary, secondary, and postsecondary schools in the United States are specifically linked to the production and maintenance of social class inequalities, and (2) to articulate key areas where important research remains to be done. In the latter regard, I address the following: (1) the necessity of intensifying research efforts on those already privileged, and (2) the importance of globalizing our research imagination as we probe the relationship between class and education in the massively shifting global context. 
3.1 Education and the Production of Social and 
Economic Inequalities 
As noted above, social scientists have long argued that school outcomes, whether achievement or attainment (how far one goes in school), are linked in large part to student social-class background, usually measured by parents' level of education, occupation, and/or income (Coleman et al., 1966; Gamoran, 1987, 2001, 2008; Gamoran & Long, 2007; Jencks et al., 1972; Reardon, 2011, 2014). What is most stunning, perhaps, is that in spite of the massification of the U.S. System of education during the 20th century, differences by social class have persisted at largely consistent levels (Arum, Gamoran, & Shavit, 2007). Campbell, Hombo, and Mazzeo (2000), for example, suggest persistent relative class differences in each persistent relative class differences in achievement-related outcomes (as linked winol Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) test score data over three decades). 
now Raftery and Bell (1993) indicate that class differences in attainment have remained relatively constant. 
In the “millennium" issue of Sociology of Education, Gamoran (2001) offers a forecast for the future of inequality. His prediction that the next hundred years would see a substantial decline in race-based inequality in the United States received enough criticism from other social scientists to cast doubt on this prediction. However, he later condiction. However, he later confirmed his conclusion regarding continued social-class inequality with new evidence that her lity with new evidence that became available after 2001, the year his original paper was published (Gamoran, 2008). As published (Gamoran, 2008). As Gamoran notes in this 2008 follow-up price: “To foreshadow my current findings, the updated current findings, the updated evidence, and new politics do not provide a basis for overturning the earlier conclusion that the oute 
earlier conclusion that the outcomes of US education will continue to be stratified by social class” (p. 169). 
Although my focus in this chapter is education and social class, there is a strong correlation between race and class in the United States, as high proportions of African Americans and Latinos Hispanics who are from non-privileged backgrounds suffer under the weight of exclusion and marginalization. In highlighting social class, then, I do not mean to deny the ongoing and independent effects of race in the production of inequalities through school, a point that is particularly salient in the United States and increasingly important in the United Kingdom, Germany, and France, where immigrant populations of color have significantly altered the social and economic landscape since World War II. Rather, it is to suggest that class is a fundamental organizer of social experience, both objective and subjective and that it additionally constitutes an organizer that is at times ignored in our discussions of race and ethnicity. As work by Banks and Banks (2013), Ladson-Billings (2006), Ogbu (1988), McCarthy (1988), Leonardo (2013), and others remind us, the experiences of racially subordinated groups cannot be understood entirely by looking at social class because race has its own independent trajectory with regard to the production of subjectivities and lived-out inequalities (Massey & Denton, 1993; Oliver & Shapiro, 1995). 
There is a rich literature spanning the ways that class stratification in families and K-12 educational institutions affect three sets of educationally related outcomes: academic achievement and attainment (see references above), postsecondary entrance and graduation (Bailey & Dynarski, 2011: Bastedo & Jaquette. 2011), and short- and long-term e and income (Jencks et al., 1972). Such class-related stratification through schools serves to privilege those already privileged, while simultaneously denying opportunities to poor, working-class, and, increasingly, lower-middle-class students. These include, among others: 
Се 
• Social and cultural capital embedded within families and the extent to which such varying 
forms of capital are differentially valued by schools (Horvat & Antonio, 1999; Ladson-Billings, 
1995, 2006; Lareau, 2000, 2003) 
• Academic tracking (Gamoran & Mare, 1989; Kelly, 2008; Lee & Bryk, 1988; Lucas, 2001; 
Oakes, 1985) 
• High-stakes testing (Haney, 1993; McNeil, 2000; Nichols & Berliner, 2007) 
• Differential access to academic knowledge in elementary school (Anyon, 1981) 
• Differential access to rigorous math and science courses in secondary school (Aaronson, 
Barrow, & Sander, 2007; Alexander & Cook, 1982; Burkam & Lee, 2003; Ma & McIntyre, - 2005; Oakes, Joseph, & Muir, 2003; Riegle-Crumb, 2006; Wimberly & Noeth, 2005) that are We directly linked to college attendance patterns 
: Dropout and push-out patterns (Fine, 1991) that contribute to pipeline construction, particularly in secondary schools (Haney et al., 2005). • Increased segregation and hypersegregation resulting from the repeal of desegregation court 
orders (Orfield & Lee, 2005) 
Although all the aforementioned mechanisms of exclusion are important in producing and sustaining class inequalities, space prevents discussion of all of those noted. Here I highlight two such mechanisms, as they are key to the role of K-12 institutions in class production and reproduction: (1) ability grouping and tracking, and (2) “official” knowledge and its distribution. 
3.2 Ability Grouping and Tracking Ray Rist (1970) conducted groundbreaking work by observing a group of African American children through their kindergarten, first-grade, and second-grade years. On the basis of 
and second-grade years. On the basis of careful ethnographic data gathering, he notes that the kindergarten teacher divides students into separation groups in the classroom according to not to measured ability but to characteristics typically associated with differential social-class backgrounds, such as appearance, behavior, and language use. After the eighth day of kindergarten, students are placed at three tables, with students at the highest-ability reading table more closely approximating children of middle-class background in their dress and grooming (e... hair is carefully brushed and tied or braided) as well as in their use of standard American English. The remaining two tables of medium and low reading ability are composed of students who are poorly dressed and speak in a neighborhood-based dialect. 
Throughout the 3 years of observation, Rist chronicles a class-based “self-fulfilling prophecy," one accompanied by the teacher spending relatively less time instructing the lower-ability groups (students at table 3 could not even see the board due to the placement of the table). Over time, students themselves begin to refer to one another as "smart" or “dumb” based on table placement. Rist argues that this self-fulfilling prophecy creates an immovable class-linked “caste system,” wherein students placed at table I on day 8 of kindergarten are the only ones who both learn to read at grade level and have a chance at success. Most interestingly in light of the argument in this chapter, the kindergarten teacher in Rist's study is Black, thereby affirming the power of class in relation to race in this particular instance. 
By second grade, students in table 3 are referred to as “the clowns.” This is in spite of the fact that the students' IQ test scores in kindergarten reveal no significant differences across the three tables. Over time, however, vast differences emerge with regard to academic achievement differences that Rist and others attribute to subjective judgment and subsequent teacher behavior as related to assumed class differences in academic ability. 
What begins with Rise as a blistering critique of the effects of ability-group assignment as related to class production and reproduction begins to temper somewhat over time. Key research since Risi expands into math ability groups (Hallinan & Sorensen, 1987; Useem, 1992) as well as into later elementary school grades and the relatively long-term effects of ability grouping. The gender of students (Hallinan & Sorensen, 1987) joins social class and race as variables considered in conjunction with sorting, and the effects of social class per se are seen as less robust. No studies, however, use the longitudinal approach pioneered by Rist as a way of assessing the effects of ability grouping over time, suggesting that ability-group placement in the early elementary years may have long-standing class-linked effects. Studies of older students or those studies that do not employ a longitudinal design (i.e., studying the same children over time from a young age) may miss the full impact of initial group placement on high school track placement and academic achievement. 
Findings quantitative (those that are statistical in nature) and qualitative (those that are ethnographically driven)-related to social class and the high school track structure are more compelling with respect to the creation and/or maintenance of social inequalities. Rosenbaum's (1075) highly quantitative assessment of the internal workings of the track structure in a homogeneous White working-class school challenges the notion that track placement is accomplished meritocratically (i.e., solely through factors such as test scores). A high proportion of variance in track placement cannot be explained by any of the variables ostensibly used tracks, and measured IQ (the most valid and stable of the variables by virtue of  Rosenbaum's statistical analysis) accounts for the smallest amount of variance in track place 
is for the smallest amount of variance in track placement when compared with all other competing variables. Fifty percent of college attendance o 
variables. Fifty percent of college attendance, on the other hand, can be explained by track placement, suggesting that track placement takes on suggesting that track placement takes on a life of its own once students are tracked into specific locations in the track structure specific locations in the track structure. Rosenbaum argues that since track 
gained by a set of valid and stable criteria, and since such placement is so placement cannot be explained by a set of valid and stable are powerful in terms of predicting college attendance, tracking should be eliminated. 
Oakes (1985) explores qualitatively the tracking experiences qualitatively the tracking experiences of students at 25 junior high 
unlike she work of Rosenbaum, includes students from varying social and high schools, which, unlike the work of Rosenbaum 
Her work extends that of Rosenbaum in that she looks closely at class and racial backgrounds. Her work extends that of Ro 
the tracking experience of students who are not White as well as those of varying class background. Oakes finds that college tracks (as opposed to non-college tracks) foster independence in students, involve more time spent on instruction, and are composed of a more White and middle to the upper-middle-class student population. Lower or non college tracks, on the other hand, enforce conformity, spend less time on classroom instruction, and include higher levels of non-White and working-class students. 
Vanfossen, Jones, and Spade (1987) explore tracking through the use of 1982 follow-up data from the 14,825 sophomore and senior students in the High School and Beyond (HSB) study, concluding that key individual, school-level, and social-psychological variables affect track placement. They argue that academic or college track students are more committed to academic goals, exhibit better classroom discipline, and receive better treatment from teachers than students in noncollege tracks. These findings support the work of Rosenbaum (1975) and Oakes (1985) as well as expand on the variables involved, broadening the scope of existing tracking research in terms of social class and racial groups. Gamoran (1987) uses the sophomore data from both the original (1980) and follow-up (1982) HSB studies to determine between- and within-school differences with respect to learning opportunities, concluding that variation in student experiences in school exerts important effects on student achievement, with patterns in course-taking being the most significant within-school factor. 
Research is quite clear then that track placement has consequences in terms of the type of knowledge students are exposed to and the college options available to such students when they leave high school (Oakes, 1985; Rosenbaum, 1976). Unfortunately, recent research suggests that track structures are difficult to alter because of the social, political, and economic forces that work to maintain them (Fine, Weis, Powell, & Wong, 1997; Oakes & Wells, 1996). Yonezawa and Wells (2005), for instance, argue that classes continue to be segregated by race and class, maintaining low-income and minority student populations in the lowest levels in spite of attempts by select schools to break down such race/class links to tracking. Predominantly African American and Latino/Latina students, who form the low and middle tracks, resist entering high-track classes even when given a “choice” because of the ways in which these classes are both presented to -them (as “not for theni”) and perceived by them.